Running ./pdb2burial
   First argument: name of a PDB file to analyse.
   Optional second argument: probe radius, default 1.4.

   Writes <filename>_burial.pdb
      in which the occupancy column contains burial depth
      Hydrogens are ignored.
      Surface-exposed atoms have burial distance 0.01.

Running ./pdb2bonds
   First argument: name of a PDB file to analyse.
   Optional second argument: polar energy cutoff.
      Cutoff in kcal/mol, default -0.1.

   Writes <filename>.map, mapping PDB serials to internal indices.
          cov.bonds, listing covalent bonds.
          polar.bonds, listing hydrogen bonds and salt bridges.
          phobic.bonds, listing hydrophobic tethers.

Running ./pdb2nodes
   Single argument: name of a PDB file to analyse.
   Will identify one node per residue for elastic network.
   Standard residues use CA position.
   Het groups report geometric centre of residue.
   All nodes written as ATOM...CA entries.
   Writes output file nodes.pdb

Running ./nodes2modes
   First argument: number of nontrivial modes to generate.
   Reads from nodes.pdb
   Reports elastic network matrix as net.sdijf
   Reports eigenpairs as net.eigenfacs

   Optional second argument: interaction range in Angstroms.
      (default value: 10.0)
   Optional third argument: intersite spring constant.
      (default value: 1.0)
   Optional fourth argument: onsite spring constant.
      (default value: 1.0E-10)

Running ./splitModes
   Requires node positions in nodes.pdb
   and mode vectors in net.eigenfacs.

Running ./pdbRCD
   First argument: name of a PDB file to analyse.
   Optional second argument: polar energy cutoff.
      Cutoff in kcal/mol, default -0.1.

   Also requires the MATCHING constraint files:
      cov.bonds, polar.bonds, phobic.bonds.

SCRIPTING: the loopRCD.sh script uses pdbRCD.
   Run this script using the name of your protein as argument
   E.g. "bash loopRCD.sh prot.pdb"
   The script call pdbRCD using a series of energy cutoffs
   Cutoff list is defined at the head of the script as "cutlist"

Running ./pdbMobility
Expects at least FIVE arguments.
   First argument: the name of a PDB file.
   Second argument: an energy cutoff.
   Third argument: a directed step size.
   Fourth argument: total steps, e.g. 1000
   Fifth argument: report every N steps, e.g. 100
   OPTIONAL sixth argument: mismatch tolerance (defaults to 0.1)

   Energy cutoff is used to eliminate weak polar interactions.
   Please give a value in kcal/mol between 0 and -10.
   Step size is used for perturbations.
   Please give a value in Angstroms of order 0.1.
   Sign determines parallel/antiparallel bias.
   Mismatch tolerance, in Angstroms, of order 0.1.

   Also expects the following constraint files,
   which must match the PDB file:
   covalent bonding in cov.bonds, 
   polar interactions in polar.bonds,
   and phobic tethers in phobic.bonds.

   And a bias directions file mode.bias.
   containing a bias direction for each residue.

   Output: a "frame" at every N steps, with numerical suffix.

SCRIPTING: the loopFLEX.sh script uses pdbMobility.
  Arguments for pdbMobility are defined at the head of the script.
  These include a list of energy cutoffs and a list of modes .
  The script creates a folder for each cutoff, mode and direction.
  pdbMobility is run in each folder to generate frames.


Usage: ./staticExpert configFilename
   Will read commands from config file.

Usage: ./mobileExpert configFilename
   Will read commands from config file.

